---

title: Learnings in 2019

date: "2019-12-27"

template: "post"

draft: false

slug: "/2019-learnings"

category: "Life"

description: "Compiling my 2019 learnings after moments of clarity"

---

Sometimes there are moments of clarity — those usually get triggered by important life changes.

I feel that 2019 started and ended with moments of clarity for me. In those reflexive periods, things click. You look back, and you see a cohesive series of events that you can extract learnings from. I want to share some of them today:

- **Discover uncomfortable truths**: Uncomfortable truths about oneself are hard to discover because unveiling them usually hurts your own ego. But they are essential for personal growth.
- **Self confidence and stupidity are close neighbors**: When I was a teen, I used to think that I knew *way more* than anyone else just because I had a younger, fresher perspective. That assumption is not only totally flawed, but also hurts learning and personal growth. Now I try to assume that everyone is smarter than me by default. This enables learning.
- **Say no**: I’m an overly idealistic and optimistic person. Commitments pile and constrain. Saying no is the only way to not get into that situation in the first place.
- **Build something people want**: Again, I’m overly idealistic. I usually dream about the world in a few decades, and then try to build that. Unfortunately the world doesn’t work that way. You cannot time travel and sell your product — so build something people want *now.*
- **Spend less money**: Even if you do have it, spending more creates commitments — both in startups and personal life, you end up being a victim of the sunk cost fallacy. Spend less, have less commitments.
- **[Value what you have](https://luisivan.net/value-what-you-have)**: Remember this every morning and every night.
- **Listen**: The people I work with are the best that I could ever dream of working with. The network that I have offers vast possibilities for advice — but to take advantage of it I need to *truly* listen. In meetings and calls, ask questions and let everyone speak first. Keep asking until you are satisfied. Act last.
- **Eat my ego**: This is crucial for listening. Sometimes we only hear what we want to listen. Being a great leader means doing the best for the project, even if I need to face uncomfortable truths about myself.
- **Don’t be superficial in my assumptions**: Don’t be satisfied with having superficial arguments to defend my positions. Ask myself more questions, be thorough. Foundational assumptions are important and we cannot build off a flawed foundation.
- **Don’t be superficial**, in general: Listen before speaking, read before writing, research before making assumptions, etc.
- **Slow down to gain perspective**: Sometimes slowing down enables getting on a faster direction. [Tunnel effect applies to life and startups as well](https://twitter.com/licuende/status/1205905592356880390).
- **Short-term focus, long-term outlook**: Long-term visions are *only* achieved by winning short-term battles.

I’m sure there are many others that I forgot. Thanks for reading, and hope you also take a few minutes to reflect and share yours!

Wishing everyone a prolific 2020!